## MINSITRY OF HEALTH AND MEDICAL INDUSTRY OF

## TURKMENISTAN STATE SANITARY &amp; EPIDEMIOLOGICAL SERVICE

## NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR CONTAINMENT OF ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE IN TURKMENISTAN, 2017-2025

ASHGABAT 2017

## TÜRKMENISTANYŇ SAGLYGY GORAÝYŞ  WE DERMAN SENAGATY MINISTRLIGI

744036 Aşgabat (1970) Arçabil şaýoly, 20 tel/faks: (+810 993 12) 40-04-46, 40-04-16, 40-04-07

## MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND

## MEDICAL INDUSTRY OF TURKMENISTAN

20, Archabil av, (1970) Ashgabat,  744036 tel/faks: (+810 993 12) 40-04-46, 40-04-16, 40-04-

07

№ 371

«16» noýabr 2017 ý

## B U Ý R U K

'Türkmenistanda 2017-2025-nji ýyllar döwür ücin mikroblara garşy dermanlara durnuklylygyň döremegine garşy hereketleriň Milli strategiýasyny tassyklamak barada'

'Raýatlaryň Saglygyny  goramak  hakynda'  Türkmenistanyň  Kanunyny, 'Türkmenistany  ykdysady,  syýasy  we  medeni  taýdan  ösdürmegiň  2020-nji  ýyla çenli döwür üçin baş ugry' Milli maksatnamasyny we Türkmenistanyň Prezidentiniň 'Saglyk' Döwlet maksatnamasyny durmuşa geçirmek,  we saglygy goraýyş edaralarynyň barlaghanalarynda alynyp barylýan işleriniň hilini kämilleşdirmek,  saglygy  goraýyş  edaralaryň  işini  döwrebap  guramak  maksady bilen,

## T A S S Y K L A Ý A R Y N:

- 1. 'Türkmenistanda 2017-2025-nji ýyllar döwür ücin mikroblara garşy dermanlara durnuklylygyň döremegine garşy hereketleriň Milli strategiýasyny (goşundy №1).
- 2. 'Türkmenistanda 2017-2025-nji ýyllar döwür üçin mikroblara garşy dermanlara durnuklylygyň döremegine garşy hereketleriň Milli strategiýasyny durmuşa geçirmek boýunça çäreleriň Meýilnamasyny' (goşundy №2).
- 3. 'Türkmenistanda 2017-2025-nji ýyllar döwür üçin mikroblara garşy dermanlara durnuklylygyň döremegine garşy hereketleriň Milli strategiýasyny durmuşa geçirmek boýunça çäreleriň ornaşdyrylmagyna monitoringi we baha berişi geçirmegiň Meýilnamasyny' (goşundy  №3).

## B U Ý U R Ý A R Y N:

.

<!-- image -->

- 1. Türkmenistanyň Saglygy goraýyş we derman senagaty Ministriň orunbasary T. Silliýewe:
- 1.1.Ýokarda tassyklanan 'Mikroblara garşy dermanlara durnuklylygyň döremegine garşy hereketleriň Milli strategiýasyny' gyşarnyksyz ýerine ýetirilmegini üpjün etmeli.
- 2. Ähli Saglygy goraýyş edaralarynyň başlyklaryna, Döwlet arassaçylyk we keselleriň  ýaýramagyna  garşy  göreşmek  gullugynyň  Jemgyýetçilik  saglygy  we iýmit merkeziniň başlygy A. Öwezowa, Aýratyn howply ýokanç keselleriň öňüni alyş  merkeziniň  başlygy    K.  Mawlanowa,  Derman  serişdelerini  hasaba  alyş  we olaryň hiline döwlet gözegçiligi merkeziniň direktory Ö. Owwadowa,  Baş dermanhana  birleşiginiň  direktory  B.Meýmanowa,  Ýokanç  keselleri  merkezleri müdirýetiniň Baş müdiri M.Mämmedowa, Halkara okuw-ylmy merkeziniň direktoryň  orunbasary  A.  Seitmedowa,  Türkmenistanyň  Döwlet  Lukmançylyk uniwersitetiniň rektory A. Orazalyýewa:
- 2.1. Ýurdumyzyň saglygy goraýyş ulgamynda ýokançlaryň derman serişdelerine durnuklylygy babatda saglygy goraýyş edaralaryň barlaghanalarynda alynyp  barylýan  işleriniň  hilini  kämilleşdirmegi  we  işe  ornaşdyrylmagyny  üpjün etmeli;
- 2.2.    'Türkmenistanda  2017-2025-nji  ýyllar  döwür  üçin  mikroblara  garşy dermanlara  durnuklylygyň  döremegine  garşy  hereketleriň  Milli  strategiýasyny durmuşa  geçirmek  boýunça  çäreleriň  Meýilnamasyny'  durmuşa  geçirilmeginiň gidişiniň  seljermesini  ara  alyp  maslahatlaşmak  boýunça  her  6  aýdan  Milli  işçi toparynyň yzygiderli mejlislerini geçirmegi üpjün etmeli.
- 3. Türkmenistanyň  Saglygy  goraýyş  we  derman  senagaty  ministrliginiň okuw mekdepleri, ylym we işgärler bölüminiň başlygynyň w.w.ýe.ýe B. Annaýewa:
- 3.1.  Şu  buýrugy  Türkmenistanyň  Saglygy  goraýyş  we  derman  senagaty ministrliginiň degişli edaralaryň ýolbaşçylarynyň dykgatyna ýetirmeli.
- 4. Şu buýrugyň ýerine ýetirilişine gözegçiligi Ministriň orunbasary T. Siliýewe tabşyrmaly.

Ministr                                       N. Amannepesow

## MINSITRY OF HEALTH AND MEDICAL INDUSTRY OF

## TURKMENISTAN STATE SANITARY &amp; EPIDEMIOLOGICAL SERVICE

## NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR CONTAINMENT OF ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE IN TURKMENISTAN, 2017-2025

ASHGABAT 2017

## Abbreviations and Acronyms

| NS         | National  Strategy  for  Containment  of  Antimicrobial  Resistance  in  Turkmenistan, 2017-2025                            |
|------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| PA         | Plan  of  Action  for  implementation  of  the  National  Strategy  for  Containment of Antimicrobial Resistance, 2017-2025 |
| AMR        | Antimicrobial Resistance                                                                                                    |
| AMA        | Antimicrobial agents                                                                                                        |
| AST        | Antimicrobial Susceptibility Test                                                                                           |
| AMC        | Antimicrobial Medicines Consumption network                                                                                 |
| SofAMR     | Spread of antimicrobial resistance                                                                                          |
| MoH&MIT    | Ministry of Health and Medical Industry of Turkmenistan                                                                     |
| SSES       | State Sanitary & Epidemiological Service                                                                                    |
| SES        | Sanitary & Epidemiological Service                                                                                          |
| TSMU       | Turkmen State Medical University                                                                                            |
| SRC        | State Center for Registration and Control of Medical Drugs, Medical  Supplies, Equipment and Disinfectants                  |
| ICC        | Infection Control Committee                                                                                                 |
| HF         | Health Facility                                                                                                             |
| CPEDI      | Center for Prevention of Especially Dangerous Infections                                                                    |
| PHNC       | Public Health and Nutrition Center                                                                                          |
| WHA        | World Health Assembly                                                                                                       |
| WHO        | World Health Organization                                                                                                   |
| WHO/Europe | WHO Regional Office for Europe                                                                                              |
| ESAC-Net   | European Network on Epidemiological Surveillance for AMR                                                                    |
| ECDC       | European Center for Disease Prevention and Control                                                                          |
| CAESAR     | Network on Epidemiological Surveillance for AMR in the  countries of  Central Asia and Eastern Europe                       |
| ESCMID     | European  Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases                                                          |
| RIVM       | National Institute of Public Health and Environment of Netherlands                                                          |
| PHC        | Primary Health Care                                                                                                         |
| NEDLT      | National Essential Drugs List of Turkmenistan                                                                               |
| NDRT       | National Drug Register of Turkmenistan                                                                                      |
| TB Service | Tuberculosis Prevention and Treatment Service                                                                               |
| CBD        | Capacity Building Department for Health Practitioners                                                                       |
| TB         | Tuberculosis                                                                                                                |
| MDR TB     | Multidrug Resistant Tuberculosis                                                                                            |
| ES         | (State) Epidemiological Surveillance                                                                                        |

| IPE (PPE)   | Individual Protection Equipment (Personal Protective Equipment                                                         |
|-------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| CP          | Clinical protocols on rational use of antibiotics for treatment of  common infections in out-patient and hospital care |
| SNL         | Supranational Laboratory                                                                                               |
| AMR NWG     | National AMR Working Group                                                                                             |
| EUCAST      | European Committee for Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing                                                            |
| GLASS       | Global Antimicrobial Surveillance System                                                                               |
| HIC         | MoH&MIT Health Information Center                                                                                      |
| SVS MoA     | State Veterinary Service of the Ministry of Agriculture of Turkmenistan                                                |
| XDR-TB      | Extensively drug-resistant Tuberculosis                                                                                |
| M&E         | Monitoring & Evaluation                                                                                                |
| TRI (HAI)   | Treatment Related Infection (Healthcare-associated infection)                                                          |
| UNICEF      | United Nations Children's Fund                                                                                         |
| FAO         | Food and agriculture organization                                                                                      |
| OIE         | World Organization for Animal Health ( Office International des Epizooties                                             |

## NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR CONTAINMENT OF ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE IN TURKMENISTAN, 2017-2025

## Section 1. INTRODUCTION

## Current Situation and Main Challenges

Spread of resistance to antimicrobial agents (AMR) 1  does not know national borders and has reached dimensions, which require immediate actions at the national, regional and global levels.

Antibiotic  resistance  is  a  natural  biological  response  to  improper  use  of  antimicrobial  agents (AMA);  increasing  number  of  essential  drugs,  which  become  ineffective,  contributing  to selection, survival and  replication of resistant strains of microorganisms.  When  chosen antimicrobials prove to be ineffective, the second- or third-line drugs need to be used although in the majority of cases these drugs are more expensive, less safe and not always available.

Infections caused by resistant strains are more  protracted; more  often, they require hospitalization and longer stay in the hospital, and produce worse prognosis for the patients. All of these increase both direct and indirect costs, as well as the risks of development and spread of resistant strains in communities. Antibiotic resistance affects both industrially developed and developing countries and makes an enormous social and economic impact on the societies. In developed countries, it is considered a threat to the national security.

World  Health  Assembly  Resolution  (WHA)  of  1998  urges  country-members:  to  develop measures promoting prudent and cost efficient use of antibacterials; to prohibit the dispensing of  antimicrobials  without  the  prescription  of  a  qualified  health  care  professional;  to  improve practices to prevent the spread of infection and thereby the spread of resistant pathogens; to strengthen legislation to prevent the manufacture, sale and  distribution of counterfeit antimicrobial  agents  and  the  sale  of  antibiotics  on  the  informal  market;  to  take  measures  to encourage the reduced use of antimicrobials in food-animal production. Countries also urged to encourage the development of sustainable systems to detect antimicrobial-resistant pathogens; monitor volumes and patterns of use of antimicrobial preparations and results of control efforts.

In  September  2011,  all  53  countries  in  the  WHO  European  Region  approved  the European Strategic Action Plan on Antimicrobial Resistance 2 . In May 2015, at the sixty-eighth session  of  the  World  Health  Assembly,  in  resolution  WHA68.7  a  global  plan  of  action  for combating  antimicrobial  resistance  (A68  /  20)  was  approved 3 .  The  global  awareness  of  the serious  threat  of  the  development  of  AMR  continues  to  grow,  and  the  number  of  countries actively  participating  in  control  of  AMR  is  increasing  worldwide.  Taking  into  account  the  farreaching  consequences  of  AMR  and  the  urgent  need  to  strengthen  the  response  of  many sectors and society as a whole, the fourth health issue discussed at the United Nations General Assembly  on  September  21,  2016,  was  devoted  to  the  problem  of  AMR.  The  result  was  a political  declaration  urging  all  countries  and  stakeholders  to  accelerate  and  strengthen  the response to the development of SCP and to promote the implementation of a global plan of action to combat SCP.

Global WHO Action Plan for Containment of Antimicrobial Resistance refers to this challenge. It promotes  an  algorithm  of  interventions  for  slowing  down  and  decreasing  the  spread  of antimicrobial resistance through:

- - decrease   of morbidity rate and spread of infections;
- - improvement of access to appropriate antimicrobials;
- - improvement of use of antimicrobial drugs;
- -health systems strengthening, improving these systems' monitoring capacity;
- - strengthening of legislative and regulatory base;
- - support of development of appropriate new medicines and vaccines.

Based on these considerations the necessity to urge Member-States to undertake immediate actions at the national, regional and local levels to contain antimicrobial resistance , including:

- · to develop or strengthen national plans and strategies and international collaboration for the containment of antimicrobial resistance;
- · to take urgent action to strengthen infection prevention and control, by means that include application of basic hygiene measures;
- · to mobilize human and financial resources in order to implement plans and strategies to strengthen the containment of antimicrobial resistance;
- · to  strengthen  overall  pharmaceutical  management  systems,  including  regulatory systems and supply chain mechanisms, and, where appropriate, laboratory infrastructure,  with  a  view  to  ensuring  access  to  and  availability  of  effective antimicrobial  agents,  taking  into  account  financial  and  other  incentives  that  might have a negative impact on policies for prescribing and dispensing;
- · to  monitor  the  extent  of  antimicrobial  resistance  and  monitor  regularly  the  use  of antibiotics  in  all  relevant  sectors,  in  particular  health  and  agriculture,  including animal  husbandry,  and  to  share  such  information  so  national,  regional  and  global trends can be detected and monitored;
- · to  improve  among  all  relevant  care  providers,  the  public  and  other  sectors  and stakeholders awareness of (i) the threat posed by antimicrobial resistance, (ii) the need  for responsible use  of antibiotics and  (iii) the importance  of  infection prevention and control measures.

In the WHO European Region, 4  development of antibiotic resistance makes treatment of a broad range of common infections, such as sepsis due to bloodstream infections , respiratory and urinary infections,  sexually  transmitted  infections,  and  food-borne  and  water-borne  infections,  more difficult both in in-patient and out-patient settings. In addition to that, multiple drug resistance becomes more and more threatening in relation to common medical interventions and diagnostic procedures  which  have  been  considered  safe  or  practically  safe  up  to  the  recent  times.  This results in significant health  expenditures  due  to  prolonged  hospitalizations  and  increased treatment costs causing both direct and indirect societal expenses.

In some countries, use of antibiotics in veterinary, food animal husbandry and agriculture exceeds the  use  of  antibiotics  for  human  health;  this  is  an  additional  factor  for  emergence  of  resistant microorganisms which can easily spread among humans, animals, foods and environment.

Antimicrobial Resistance in the World and in the WHO European Countries

AMR is found in all countries. Patients who are infected with resistant bacteria are at higher risk of treatment faillure and mortal outcomes while using more medical resources than the patients infected with non-resistant strains of the same bacteria.

Resistance of Klebsiella pneumonia -a  common member of the enterobacteriaceae which causes life-threatening infections -to the ' last resort antibiotics ' (carbapenems) has spread to all parts of the world. Often, K. pneumoniae is the cause of nosocomial infections such as pneumonia,  bloodstream  infections,  infections  of  newborns  and  patients  in  intensive  care units.  In  some  countries,  due  to  advanced K.  pneumoniae  resistance,  carbapenems  are ineffective for treatment for more than half of the patients with this infection.

E.  coli  resistant  to  fluoroquinolones -antibiotics  commonly  used  for  treatment  of  urinary infections -is  also  wide-spread.  Today,  in  many  countries  in  the  different  geographical regions, fluoroquinolone therapy is non-effective in more than half of the cases.

At  least  ten  counties  (Australia,  Austria,  Canada,  France,  Japan,  Norway,  Slovenia,  South Africa, Sweden and U.K) registered ineffectiveness of the 'last resort' drugs for treatment of gonorrhea (3 rd  generation of cephalosporins).

WHO has recently updated its recommendations for gonorrhea treatment taking into account emerging resistance. Due to high levels of resistance of gonorrhea to quinolones, now WHO does not recommend to use them for treating this disease. Recommendations for treatment of chlamydial infections and syphilis have also been updated.

Resistance  of Staphlylococcus  aureus,  common  cause  of  severe  hospital  and  community infections, to the 1 st line drugs has also widely spread. Risk of mortality for a MRSA-infected patient is estimated at 64% higher than that for a patient infected with a non-resistant strain of Staphylococcus aureus).

Colistin is the last resort drug for treating life-threatening Enterobacteriaceae infections. Just recently,  some  countries  and  regions  have  reported  colistin-resistant  cases  which  make those infections incurable.

WHO  estimates  that  in  2014  there  were  about  480  000  cases  of  multidrug  resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) with resistance to the two most effective tuberculosis drugs. Only one case in each four (123 000 cases) were detected and recorded. MDR TB treatment requires much longer  and  less  effective  treatment  courses  that  treatment  of  regular  TB  cases.  In 2014, only half of the MDR-TB cases were successfully treated. Of the new TB cases in 2014, about 3.3% were multidrug resistant. This figure is higher among those who were treated for  tuberculosis  in the  past:  at  20%.  Extended drug resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB) cases which  are  resistant  to  at  least  four  main  tuberculosis  drugs  have  been  detected  in  105 countries. Nearly 9.7% of the MDR-TB patients also have extended drug resistance.

In  July  2016,  cases  of P.  falciparum  malaria  resistant  to  the  1 st line  therapy  (artemisinincombined therapy,  ACT)  were  confirmed  in  five  countries  of  the  Great  Mecong  subregion (Cambodia, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Thailand and Vietnam). Majority of artemisinin-resistant  cases  are  fully  cured  if  ACT  includes  another  effective  drug  together with  artemisinin.  However,  in  the  crossborder  regions  of  Cambodia  and  Thailand P. falciparum developed resistance to almost all available antimalarials making treatment very difficult and requiring close monitoring. There is a genuine risk that multidrug resistance can spread to other parts of the subregion. Resistant strains emerging in other countries would be  a  major  public  health  challenge  that  would  jeopardize  important  recent  gains  in  the malaria control.

In 2010, about 7% of HIV patients in developing countries who started their antiretroviral therapy (ART) were diagnosed with drug resistance. In the developed countries, this figure was at 10-20%. Lately, some countries reported 15% (or more) of resistance cases among patients who start their first-time treatment and up to 40% among retreatment cases. This problem needs immediate response actions. This growth of resistance also causes significant economic issues as the second and third line drugs are 3 and 18 times more expensive than the  first  line  drugs,  respectively.  Since  September  2015,  WHO  recommends  that  all  HIV patients should start antiretroviral therapy. Wider use of the ART is expected to escalate the ART  resistance  problem  in  all  regions  of  the  world.  To  achieve  maximum  and  long-term effectiveness  of  the  1 st line  ART  treatment  and  administer  the  most  effective  treatment patterns  to  the  patients,  it  is  important  to  continue  monitoring  of  the  resistance  and minimize  its  further  development  and  spread.  WHO  develops  a  new  global  action  plan  to fight  against  HIV  drug  resistance  in  2017-2021,  together  with  the  countries,  counterparts and stakeholders.

Antivirals are needed to treat epidemic and pandemic influenza. Almost all type A influenza viruses  circulating  in  human  beings  are  resistant  to  one  category  of  antiviral  drugs,  M2channel  inhibitors  (amantadine  and  remantadine).  However,  resistance  to  neuraminidase inhibitors  (oseltamivir)  remains low (1-2% of cases). Antiviral susceptibility is continuously monitored through the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System.

Countries  of  the  European  Union  have  been  systematically  collecting  and  sharing  data  on antibiotic consumption and resistance since the turn of the century through informal networks that  were  formalized  in  2010-11  when  they  transferred  to  the  European  Centre  for  Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). WHO European Regional Office (WHO/Europe) urges countries outside the European Union to collect data on the use of antibiotics on a regular basis and send data  on  prescription,  sale  and  use  of  antimicrobial  drugs  to  the  Antimicrobial  Medicines Consumption network (AMC) of WHO/Europe and data on antibiotic resistance  to the Net of Epidemiological Surveillance for Antimicrobial Resistance in the countries of Central Asia  and Eastern Europe (CAESAR) of WHO/Europe, created  jointly with the European  Society of Clinical Microbiology  and  Infectious  Diseases  (ESCMID) and  National    Institute  of  Public  Health    and Environment  of  Netherlands  (RIVM).  Data  collected  in  the  AMC  and  CAESAR  networks  are compatible to data collected in the European Surveillance of Antimicrobial Consumption network (ESAC-Net) and the European Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance network (EARS-Net) of the European Union, managed by the ECDC.

Studies made by ECDC showed that resistance of S. aureus to methicillin (methicillin -resistant S. aureus, MRSA) is at 50 percent in some Member States of the WHO European Region and at 25 percent and higher in some other EU countries. The problem of resistance of gram-negative bacteria, such as Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumonia, is growing fast in the Southern and Eastern  Europe.  In  the  EU  countries,  25,000  deaths  are  estimated  annually,  while  health requi res about € 0.9 billion of additional expenses. Data collected by the European Antimicrobial Surveillance Project (ESAC-Net), which is managed by ECDC now, is the evidence of the fact that the use of antibiotics in the eastern and southern countries of Europe is much higher than that in the northern EU countries; this leads to a higher level of drug resistance. Much less is known about antibiotic use and resistance situation in other countries of the WHO European Region;  however,  some  Member  States  (Russian  Federation,  Turkey,  Croatia)  have  made certain  progress  in  antibiotic  resistance  surveillance  and  reported  MRSA  prevalence  figures which in some countries are above 30 percent.

Despite the increased AMR threat, development, production and introduction of new antibiotics has  dramatically  dropped.  Thus,  16  new  antimicrobial  agents  were  introduced  in  practical medicine  for  1983-1987  period,  while  only  seven  were  introduced  between  1987  and  2002. Starting  from  1985,  antibiotic  programmes  of  the  largest  pharmaceutical  companies  in  the

United  States  and  Japan  have  been  gradually  closed  or  reduced  to  50  percent  by  2004. Between 1928 - when   Alexander Fleming discovered antibiotics - and 1970-ies, more than dozen antibiotic types were found, then the process of creation of new antibiotics stopped, and in  the  21 st century,  only  two  new  types  of  antibiotics  were  created:  oxazolidons  (2000)  and lipopeptides (2003).

Uncontrolled  use  of  antibiotics  in  hospitals,  polyclinics,  veterinary  services  and  animal  food production has resulted in emergence of new sources of resistant microorganisms. Prudent and reasonable use of antimicrobials is absolutely necessary in treatment of people and animals, as well  as  in  agricultural  production.  The  situation  is  aggravated  by  the  fact  that  in  many  CIS countries  antibiotics  are  still  sold,  contrary  to  regulations, without  doctors'  prescriptions in pharmacies.

The  WHA  Resolution  58.27  states  that  containment  of  antimicrobial  resistance  is  one  of  the prerequisites for achievement of a number of internationally agreed health-related goals of the UN Millennium Declaration.

With a view of all this, the WHO European Region suggests a range of goals and objectives for a  regional  strategic  plan  of  actions.  These  goals  and  objectives  have  technical,  financial, regulatory, educational and behavioral dimensions which need to be addressed in comprehensive  national  action  plans.  At  the  same  time,  antimicrobial  resistance  is  a  crossdisciplinary issue that needs to be addressed by many national - and sometimes international partners,  stakeholders  and  experts.  Seven  strategic  objectives  were  formulated  to  guide national  governments  in  consideration  of  complex  factors  related  to  and  contributing  to bacterial  resistance.  The  following  objectives  were  suggested  to  be  included  in  the  regional strategic action plan:

- · To strengthen national multisectoral coordination for the containment of antibiotic resistance.
- · To strengthen national surveillance of antibiotic resistance.
- · To promote national strategies for the rational use of antibiotics and strengthen national surveillance of antibiotic consumption.
- · To strengthen infection control and surveillance of antibiotic resistance in health care settings.
- · To prevent and control the development and spread of resistance to antibiotics used in veterinary and agriculture;
- · To promote innovation and research on new technologies.
- · To improve awareness, patient safety and partnership.

Antibiotic  resistance  is  a  global  problem  and  only  simultaneous  efforts  to  contain  antibiotic resistance in each individual country can bring positive results in the entire world.

In  the  current  situation,  slowing  down  of  development  of  antimicrobial  resistance  is  realistic only  through  holistic  evidence-based  antimicrobial  policies  which  take  into  account  general biological, medical, socio-economic and educational aspects of the problem.

Antimicrobial resistance is a multi-disciplinary issue, and its tackling requires involvement and contributions from many national, as well as international, stakeholders and counterparts.

In  May  2015,  the  Sixty-eighth  World  Health  Assembly  adopted  the  global  action  plan  on antimicrobial resistance (AMR). One of the five strategic objectives of the action plan is to strengthen the AMR evidence base through enhanced global surveillance and research.

AMR  surveillance  is  the  basis  for  measuring  the  resistance  burden  and  provision  of information  needed  to  support  local,  national  and  global  strategies. To  support  this

objective, the Global Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance System (GLASS) aims to establish a  global  standardized  approach  to  the  collection,  analysis  and  sharing  of  data  in  order  to provide information for decision making processes, to encourage local, national and regional efforts  and  to  establish  evidence  database  for  response  measures  and  communication, information and awareness raising activities. The GLASS mission is to bring together clinical, laboratory and epidemiological data on the pathogens which are of the highest threat to the human health at the global level.

AMR surveillance improves if it is connected with monitoring of antimicrobial use practices. Joint efforts of surveillance networks such as EARS-Net and EASC-Net for EU Member States and the CAESAR and AMC network for non EU Member States of the European Region  show that  comprehensive  monitoring  of  resistance  and  consumption  may  become  an  important factor for encouraging policy commitments  to successful campaigns and resistance containment actions.

## Section 2. TURKMENISTAN: CURRENT SITUATION AND MAIN CHALLENGES

## 2.1.  Current Situation

The  State  Health  Programme  (2016)  is  a  fundamental  document  which  defines  guiding principles and reflects priority areas of the health sector in Turkmenistan. The Work Plan (1999) based  on  the  Presidential  Programme  (2015-2017)  identified  its  implementation  mechanisms (Plan  for  the  realization  of  the  State  Health  Programme  of  the  President  of  Turkmenistan. Ministry of Health and Medical Industry. Ashgabat, Turkmenistan, April 1999).

In addition, the AMR legislative and regulative framework includes other documents, such as the Law 'On the Medicines in Turkmenistan' (2016), the Law 'On the Food Safety and Quality' (2009), Sanitary Code of Turkmenistan (2010), the Law of Turkmenistan "On Protection of health  of  citizens"  (2009),  the  Law  of  Turkmenistan  "On  pharmaceutical  activity  and drug provision" (2002) and comprehensive joint action plans with the Veterinary Service and other bylaws.

Implementation of activities in this area is one of the priorities within the framework of bilateral cooperation  between  the  Regional  WHO  Office  for  Europe  and  the  Ministry  of  Health  and Medical Industry of Turkmenistan (MoH&amp;MIT).

Given  the  importance  of  the  issue,  MoH&amp;MIT  initiated  establishment  of  the  AMR  National Working  Group  (NWG)  in  2014.  This  is  a  cross-sectoral  working  group  with  the  mission  to develop national documents and plans for containment of antimicrobial resistance. The NWG is comprised  of  representatives  of  the  MoH&amp;MIT,  State  Sanitary  and  Epidemiological  Service (SSES), Turkmen State Medical University ( Т SMU), Turkmenpharmatsiya, Veterinary Service and other  concerned  organizations.  The  NWG  membership  is  planned  to  be  increased  in  future. National focal points (coordinators) were designated to coordinate the activity of the NWG and technical issues.

A number of workshops were conducted with consultative and technical assistance from WHO international experts, including few training courses on AMR for health managers and specialists of different levels. National trainers were trained to conduct initial training on AMR for health workers at the central/provincial/district levels.

Information Resource Center for Containment of AMR was established within the structure of the  Ashgabat  city  SES  office.  The  Center  operates  as  an  organizational  and  methodological center for discussion, training and familiarization of health workers with the AMR aspects.

In 2014, 2015 and 2016, several WHO expert missions visited the country to assess its AMR situation and provide consultative and technical support followed with advice and recommendations. In addition to that, a training course on laboratory antimicrobial

susceptibility  testing  methods  was  provided  to  the  laboratory  specialists  at  the  central  and provincial levels in 2016.

In June 2016, a range of AMR-related recommendations and suggestions were also made by the  IHR  Joint  External  Evaluation  Mission,  which  also  covered  AMR  as  one  of  the  areas  of assessment.

The  State  Sanitary  and  Epidemiological  Service  (SSES)  and  its  most  important  division  of epidemiological  surveillance  perform  their  activities  in  compliance  with  the  laws  and  by-laws developed  and  adopted  in  the  country,  primarily -with  the  Sanitary  Code  of  Turkmenistan. Turkmenistan established legislative, economic and administrative framework to ensure public epidemic  safety  and  guarantees  of  favorable  living  conditions  for  the  current  and  future generations.

The State Sanitary and Epidemiological Service functions through its central apparatus within the structure of the Ministry of Health and Medical Industry of Turkmenistan (MoH&amp;MIT), Public Health and Nutrition Center (PHNC), Center for Prevention of Extremely Dangerous Infections (CPEDI)  and  provincial  (velayat)  and  city/district  (etrap)  sanitary  and  epidemiological  units (SES). (Table 1. Organizational Structure of the MoH&amp;MIT Sanitary and Epidemiological Service)

Table 1. Organizational Structure of the MoH&amp;MIT State Sanitary and Epidemiological Service

<!-- image -->

Clinical care is provided to population through the health facilities at different levels, including out-patient and inpatient (hospital-based) care in the central and regional healthcare settings. (Table 2. Organizational Structure of the MoH&amp;MIT Healthcare Facilities).

Table 2. Organizational Structure of the MoH&amp;MIT Healthcare Facilities

<!-- image -->

Healthcare facilities at the secondary and tertiary (regional and peripheral) levels are the main consumers of antimicrobials. They purchase antimicrobials in large quantities, although primary healthcare physicians also prescribe quite a lot of antimicrobials. The reason for this may be the lack of a formal supervision system for prescription, distribution and use of antimicrobials in the health sector pf the country.

The country has an operational infection service network (Department of the Infectious Disease Centers - 1 at the central/national level, 5 infectious disease hospitals at the provincial level and 55 infectious disease hospital departments at district/city level), which employs 207 doctors and 506 nurses.

In the in-patient and out-patient settings, patients are prescribed and administered antimicrobials  in  compliance  with  the  current  standard  methodological  guidelines  and  clinical protocols.

In clinical practice, empiric treatment is the current norm, but very few microbiological tests are taken to subsequently guide correction or adjustment of the treatment in case of failure, or to provide data for epidemiological surveillance of the general resistance pattern in the country/area.

The  processes  of  development  of  evidence-based  clinical  protocols  (CP)  and  mechanisms  of implementation of these protocols into every day healthcare practices need to be institutionalized.

Development and update of clinical protocols and guidelines and their implementation in every day  clinical  practices  are  on-going  processes,  which  involve  key  specialists  of  the  healthcare sector. In future, development and preparation of clinical protocols should be transferred to the research  and  clinical centers. MoH&amp;MIT  would  coordinate  and  implement  these  clinical protocols.  Introduction  of  clinical  protocols  into  postgraduate  curriculum  and  continuous  inservice medical education and training programmes is an essential tool for implementation of the clinical protocols.

Laboratory service is a hierarchal three-tier system and includes 103 microbiology laboratories, which  perform  microbiological  tests  as  well  as  tests  for  resistance  of  pathogenic  agents  to antimicrobials. (Table 3. Information about structure of the MoH&amp;MIT microbiology laboratories.)

Laboratories  use  modern  testing  methodologies  to  diagnose  antibiotic  resistance  in  bacteria, such  as  disk  diffusion  method,  broth  dilution  method,  as  well  as  automated  antimicrobal susceptibility  testing  instrume  (e.g.  Vitec  2)  and  automated  microbial  detection  system  (e.g. BacT\ALERT).

Laboratory testing for antimicrobial susceptibility (AMS) takes from 5 to 6 days, on average. Key microbiological spectrum  of  in-hospital and  community  infections  includes  the  following microorganisms: Streptococcus  pneumoniae,  Staphylococcus  aureus,  Enterococcus  faecalis, Enterococcus faecium, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, etc.

MoH&amp;MIT microbiology laboratory service includes: 64 SSES laboratories (1 PHNC laboratory, 6 provincial/ Ashgabat city SES and 57 city/district SES laboratories); 8 CPEDI laboratories which are the part of the SSES involved in microbiological testing for especially dangerous infections; and 29 laboratories in the structure of clinical and diagnostic laboratories of healthcare facilities which  perform  microbiological  tests.  At  the  district  level,  bacteriological  tests  are  performed mostly  by  the  sanitary-epidemiological  service  laboratories.  Some  of  the  laboratories  do  not meet  the  requirements  of  the  modern  bacteriological  laboratories.  Available  fragmentary research  data  on  antibiotic  resistance  and  nosocomial  infections  are  insufficient;  official reporting systems are not well-structured and lack efficient data verification methods; optimal

external quality control is not provided for all laboratories; molecular typing of outbreak-causing microorganisms is not performed.

Table 3. Information about the structure of the MoH&amp;MIT microbiology laboratories

|                    |   Ashgabat | Ahal   | Balkan   | Dashoguz   | Lebap   | Mary   |   Turkmenistan  total |
|--------------------|------------|--------|----------|------------|---------|--------|-----------------------|
| SES                |          1 | 8      | 11       | 11         | 18      | 14     |                    63 |
| PHNC               |          1 | -      | -        | -          | -       | -      |                     1 |
| CPEDI              |          1 | 1      | 3        | 1          | 1       | 1      |                     8 |
| Health  facilities |         10 | 2      | 2        | 2          | 6       | 9      |                    31 |
| Total              |         13 | 11     | 16       | 14         | 25      | 24     |                   103 |

The main challenge in susceptibility testing is the lack of standardized protocols for mandatory AMR investigations as well as standardized testing methodologies.

Today,  the  best-organized  drug  resistance  testing  system  exists  in  the  framework  of  the  TB Programme of Turkmenistan. A specific characteristic of its diagnostic algorithm is the hierarchy of the laboratory network at different administrative levels. Established network of laboratory diagnostics allows access to modern testing methodologies for patients at different administrative levels. It is a good sign that both internal and external quality control of laboratory tests is in place in Tuberculosis Service laboratories, including existing feedback reporting system.

The  study  of  prevalence  of  the  drug  resistant  tuberculosis,  conducted  jointly  with  the  World Health Organization, found resistance to isoniazid in 26.7% of new cases and in 32.4% cases of repeated  treatment.  Multiple  drug  resistance  (MDR  TB)  in  new  cases  was  at  15.4%  and  in chronic cases -at 38.2%. To compare, in CAR countries, MDR TB was found in 19% to 23% of new cases and up to 50% and more in repeatedly treated cases. The initiated project research of treatment effectiveness has produced good preliminary results.

In  order  to  study  the  causes  of  the  resistance  a  series  of  operational  researches  were undertaken  which  proved  that  the  main  causes  of  resistance  development  are  the  lack  of controlled treatment, concomitant disorders and diseases, and asocial behaviors.

Pre-service and in-service (undergraduate and postgraduate) education and training of health professionals  is  conducted  by  the  Turkmen  State  Medical  University  (TSMU).  In-service/postgraduate  training  is  provided  at  the doctors'  capacity  building  faculty  (CPF), University departments, such as Hospital Therapy, Microbiology, Family Medicine, post-graduate education, etc.

The State Epidemiological Surveillance Service performs a wide range of important interventions. The existing epidemiological surveillance system has been appropriately fulfilling its duties and responsibilities for many years, achieving goals and objectives set up.

It  should  be  noted  that  the  gap  list  includes  technical  and  technological  inadequacy  of  the epidemiological surveillance system with the modern level and requirements for computerization and communication. Manual processing of huge amounts of data using outdated statistical and graphical methodologies and limited means of communication are the inhibitive factors for the functional operations of the State Epidemiological Surveillance at current stage.

SSES collects  a  lot  of  data  on  infectious  diseases  and  infection-related  information.  Its  work includes  identification  of  infectious  agents,  causes  and  conditions  for  spread  of  infectious diseases, anti-epidemic interventions, and statistical recording and reporting. Great amounts of information accumulated in SSES need to be regularly analyzed which can be properly made only using appropriate information technologies.

The country has a functional system of epidemiological surveillance for infections emerging in health facilities, that include the entire complex of activities related to making justified prudent decisions  on  development  of  measures  for  fighting  and  prevention  of  these  infections.  SES staffs  at  all  levels  include  specialists  in  charge  of  controlling  epidemiological  surveillance  and compliance in the healthcare facilities.

Special  emphasis  is  made  on  supply  of  disposal  equipment  and  sterilization  instruments , disinfectants and health workers' individual means of protection.

Hand washing technique, protocols of hand washing have been introduced into the program of health  workers'  training  since  dirty  hands  are the  main  way  for  infection  transmission.  Much attention is given to the individual protection equipment, such as gloves and special uniform.

Supervision of compliance with sanitary and epidemiological requirements in maternity hospitals where  new  WHO  delivery  technologies  and  recommendations  are  introduced  is  also  in  the scope of SES activities.

Infection Control Committees (ICC) are organized in accordance with appropriate orders in all health facilities. ICC  coordinates the system  of  efficient organizational, preventive and antiepidemic measures aimed to prevent emergence and spread of hospital infections, including appropriateness of prescription and use of antimicrobials.

Special  focus  is  made  on  the  architectural  and  planning  decisions  at  the  design  stage  of  the healthcare  facilities  (layout,  efficient space  allocation,  convenient  routes  for  patient  and personnel flows, zoning of territory etc.).

Laboratory  and  instrumental  monitoring  exercise,  including  for  microbiological  indicators  for objects and environment in healthcare facilities, is regularly performed. This monitoring exercise allows  revealing  derangements  with  respect  to  requirements  for  sanitary  and  epidemiological regime and undertaking appropriate measures in a timely manner.

Harmonization of the system with international requirements, adoption of modern approaches and  optimization  of  sanitary  and  hygienic  interventions  to  prevent  in-hospital  infections  in health  care  facilities  will  significantly  reduce  the  risk  of  emerging  infections  and  result  in improvement of quality of health services provided to the population.

According to the National Drug (Medicine) Register of Turkmenistan, as of 01.01.2017, 3641 items of pharmaceuticals/medical drugs and medical goods were registered in Turkmenistan in the  period  between  01/07/2015  and  01/01/2017.  Of  them,  317  items  are  antimicrobials (excluding antivirals). Three antimicrobials are produced in Turkmenistan (0.9%).

124 antimicrobials,  which  are  included  in  the  existing  list  of  essential  drugs,  were  registered during this period.

Introduction of a socially targeted system for the rational use of medical drugs is one of the most  important  areas  of  the  MoH&amp;MIT  activities.  This  process  includes  formulation  and approval  of  the  State  List  of  Essential  Drugs.  The  State  List  of  Essential  Drugs  includes  357 registered drugs; 41 of them are antimicrobials, antivirals and antifungals. There is also a State List  comprising  130  drugs  which  are  provided  to  the  medically  insured  patients  with  90% discount of the regular price, including 41 antibacterials, antifungals  and antivirals (substitutes are not counted) and a National Register based on competent and evidence-based professional selection of the most therapeutically efficient and cost-effective and safe medicines; development and dissemination of fair pharmaceutical information; training of health personnel; monitoring of appropriate use of medicines, and measures to prevent and correct  medication mistakes.

The State Center for registration of medicines and quality control of medical supplies, medical equipment  and  disinfectants  (SCR)  and  «Bash  Dermanhana  Association»  are  the  MoH&amp;MIT main partners in establishing the system of efficient use of medical drugs.

According to the current regulations, the SCR s organizational structure includes: '

- · Department of Registration of Medicines with its services:
- a) Registration of drugs and pharmaceutical supervision, with the good clinical practice group (GCP) and Secretariat of the Pharmacological Committee
- b) Post-registration changes, additions and expertise of medicine packing
- c) Pharmaceutical expertise with the medicine research groups of the national pharmaceutical industries and adoption of rules of good manufacturing practices (GMP)
- · Department of Medicine Quality Control with:
- a) Laboratory for drug quality control
- b) Medicine quality certification service
- c) Post-registration medicine quality supervision service
- d) Pre-registration inspection for compliance with the GMP rules
- · Department of Registration and Certification of Medical Supplies, Medical Equipment and Disinfectants
- · Logistics Department
- · Licensing, Monitoring and Information Department with its services:
- a) Licensing and monitoring of importation of medicines
- b) Marketing and control of prices for medicines
- c) Information about medicines and methodological bureau

This  SGR  structure  allows  not  only  registration  (including  comparative  studies  of  quality, microbiological and therapeutical effectiveness of the whole range of antibacterials and other agents) but also active involvement of the Center in collection and consolidation of regional and facility  requests  for  medicines,  as  well  as  on-going  monitoring  and  comparative  analysis  of prices  for  essential  drugs  in  order  to  reasonably  reduce  budgetary  expenses  on treatment  of socially important diseases, and implementation of the national programme for containment of antibacterial resistance (in line with the WHO recommendations).

The SCR and «Bash Dermanhana Association» have already started establishing a monitoring system for antibiotic consumption and formulation of national recommendations for rational use of  antibiotics  and  national  compliance  regulations.  However,  it  is  imperative  to  disseminate relevant recommendations to medical education institutions and other health-related institutions because it may result in decrease of antibiotic prescriptions.

At the Center's initiative, the Ministry of Health of Turkmenistan issued a decree #117 on 12 April  2012  on  prohibiting  retail  sale  of  all  tuberculosis  drugs,  including  rifampicin,  in  public pharmacies.

Audits of the public pharmacy network also allowed to regulate prescription of fluoroquinolones, especially  the  ones  which  are  included  in  the  Essential  Drugs  List  and  used  for  tuberculosis treatment (ofloxacin, levofloxacin).

At present, there are 247 licensed pharmacies in Turkmenistan; of those, 68 pharmacies are private, including 4 pharmacy  storages, and  179  are government-owned.  Licenses  for importation,  exportation,  wholesale  and  retail  sale  of  drugs  are  issued  by  the  License Department of the Ministry of Health in accordance with the current legislation. An individual license  is  required  for  each  private  pharmacy;  public  (government-owned)  pharmacies  work under the general license and 'Turkmen Pharmacy' supervision.

In April 2000, a Health Information Center was established in order to take effective measures to protect and improve public health, spiritual and moral education, change of health behaviors, sanitary  and  hygienic  education  of  people  and  promotion  of  healthy  life  styles.  This  was  the beginning of creation of a new preventive service in the country. The Health Information Center is  involved  in  health  education  and  communication  and  awareness  raising  work  both  among health professionals and public at large.

The Health Information Center organized the 2009 Health Day events which were dedicated to antimicrobial  resistance  issues,  and  since  that  time,  it  has  placed  special  emphasis  in  its activities on prevention of the antimicrobial resistance.

Awareness of  patients,  as  well  as  of  health  professionals,  is  of  great  importance.  Survey  on AMR  which  was  conducted  in  2014  among  the  general  public,  patients  and  PHC  doctors revealed that the majority of the patients received information from the doctors but would also like to receive it from the media and pharmacy workers. The interviews of the primary health care  specialists  showed  that  during  the  past  month  70%  of  them  prescribed  antibiotics, fluoroquinolones more often than any others.

No studies of self-medication have been yet carried out in Turkmenistan; however, the extent of self-treatment may be assumed to be rather wide because when people get ill they often tend to treat themselves using a broad range of available pharmaceuticals, including antimicrobials.

In January 2016, the Law of Turkmenistan  On Supply of Medicines ' ' came into force. This Law is aimed to improve legal and organizational framework of governmental regulation of relations in the field of drug supply, including antimicrobial-related issues.

The time has come to develop a national policy for the rational  use  of  antibiotics  with  strict control of their prescription and sale, which requires legislative changes and amendments and an antibiotic consumption monitoring system.

Recognition of the existence of the AMR problem and creation of national efficiently working cross-sectoral groups of specialists is considered a significant step for successful implementation and intervention control of AMR. International interdisciplinary collaboration is also necessary.

Development of the National AMR Strategy and Action Plan will make it possible to discuss the AMR  issues  and  undertake  appropriate  measures  to  contain  antimicrobial  resistance  and continue scientific research aimed to fill knowledge gaps.

## Situation analysis of antimicrobial resistance in Turkmenistan

An in-depth situation analysis is needed  to ensure effectiveness of the planned and implemented  AMR  interventions.  The  analysis  would  help  to  identify  the  main  areas  of implementation of the National Strategy. It is necessary to consider data of the main indicators, such as:

- · Prevalence of common infectious diseases (hospital and community infections, infections in children and in adults).
- · Identification of ten most common infectious diseases at the PHC/hospital care levels.
- · Most frequently prescribed antimicrobials at the PHC/hospital care levels.
- · Average duration of antimicrobials intake at the PHC/hospital care levels.
- · Availability of MoH&amp;MIT-approved standards (clinical protocols) for treatment of prevalent/common infectious diseases.
- · System in place for regular supervision of appropriate drug prescriptions at the PHC/hospital care levels.

- · Availability of data on microbiological etiologies responsible for the common infectious diseases and their susceptibilities to commonly prescribed antibiotics Names and quantities of antimicrobials produced and imported into the country.
- · Names and quantities of antimicrobials sold through the retail pharmacy network in the country.
- · Antimicrobial quality control along the whole production-to-consumption chain.
- · Government control of the antimicrobials advertising.
- · Public awareness and information for health professionals about infectious diseases and efficient antimicrobial therapy.

## Section  3. Goals &amp;  Objectives  of the National Strategy  and  Main  Areas  of Implementation

The National Strategy has been developed based on the WHO Global Strategy on Containment of  AMR,  strategic  goals  of  the  European  Strategic  Plan  of  Action  oon  Antibiotics,  including technological, financial and educational aspects of the implementation.

The strategy is focused on people and interventions are supposed to affect groups of people, engaged  in  the  activities  related  to  AMR.  These  people  should  be  the  part  of  a  problem solution: health workers  that prescribe medicines, pharmaceutical  workers,  veterinaries, consumers,   policy developers in healthcare and in agriculture and in pharmaceutical industry.

The strategy's goal is targeted to solution of the AMR issues as a whole and not tackling the issue of a certain disease; in particular, the strategy is focused on resistance to antibacterials. Priorities in this area of activity should be harmonized with national realization.  Improvement of the use of antimicrobials should be the first step on the way to contain resistance. Increasing of access  to  these  drugs  and  change  in  behavior  should  be  in  the  scope  of  activities,  which definitely requires time.

## Main Goal:

Containment of development and spread of antimicrobial resistance, preservation of effectiveness of antimicrobial agents

## Objectives:

## OBJECTIVES:

- 1. Establish national AMR surveillance system.
- 2. Introduce  measures  to  ensure  rational  use  of  antimicrobials  in  public  health  and veterinary service.
- 3. Estimate quantities of antimicrobial consumption.
- 4. Improve quality control system for the use of antimicrobials.
- 5. Establish  a  system  of  medical  notification  on  the  development  of  resistance  and  a system  for  promotion  of  antimic robials' rational  use  among  health  specialists  and population.

## Section 4. Main Areas of the National Strategy Implementation

Taking  into  consideration  that  the  WHO  Global  Strategy  for  Containment  of  Antimicrobial Resistance is aimed at patients and population as a whole; doctors and drug distributers; public health professionals and health managers; consumers of antimicrobials in agriculture; scientists and researchers; pharmaceutical industry; international agencies and professional associations;

and taking into account resolutions of the Sixty-seventh session of the World Health Assembly and  in  line  with  the  provisions  of  the  European  Strategic  Plan  of  Action  on  Antimicrobial Resistance -the Ministry of Health and Medical Industry of Turkmenistan considers it necessary to focus on the following key issues:

- 1. Prevention and control of infectious diseases.
- 2. Control of АМ R.
- 3. Control of access to antimicrobials.
- 4. Rational use of antimicrobials.

## Section 5. Activities of Implementation of the National Strategy

Taking into account the seriousness of the problem, the Ministry of Health and Medical Industry initiated creation of an intersectoral working group for development of national documents and plans on containment of current and emerging antimicrobial resistance. The group includes representatives of the Ministry of Health, veterinarian service and academic sector. It is planned to add new members to the group in the future.

Emphasis is made on strengthening interaction between clinical, laboratory and pharmaceutical specialists. A large spectrum of activities is planned within the frameworks of implementation of the above-mentioned  areas  of  activities given that specifics of each  area  is taken  in consideration.

## 5.1. Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases

Activities planned to be implemented in this area:

- · Strengthen  infection  control  programmes  in  healthcare  facilities  and  implement  modern recommendations and measures to prevent nosocomial infections.
- · Strengthen  activities  and  functions  of  the  Infection  Control  Committees  in  healthcare facilities, as well as define and enhance the role of a clinical pharmacologist in AMR control.
- · Revise/update/develop infection control regulations.
- · Organize training courses on infection control and prevention of nosocomial infections.
- · Raise awareness of patients about simple measures to prevent and reduce infections in the family or community environment, such as immunization, hand-washing, nutrition, hygiene, etc.
- · Increase  immunization  coverage  and other  health  interventions  to  prevent  diseases  and reduce use of antimicrobials.

## 5.2.  Monitoring of Antimicrobial Resistance

Activities planned to be implemented in this area:

- · Establish a national epidemiological surveillance system for collection, analysis and reporting of data on emergence and dynamics of resistance of certain pathogens, including reporting of new resistant cases.
- · Ensure availability of coordination mechanism enabling efficient surveillance of AMR, including monitoring of antimicrobials use, development of national recommendations on rational use of antimicrobials, and national regulations for compliance.
- · Establish a the three-level functional system of interaction of microbiological laboratories on AMR. Create a network of laboratories for the AST.
- · Ensure mandatory antimicrobial susceptibility testing in accordance with approved clinical protocols.

- · Strengthen capacity of clinical and microbiological laboratories (in hospitals, SES, CPEDI, research laboratories, food laboratories).
- · Identify an appropriately equipped laboratory with required functional capacities as a scientific and methodological center -an AMR reference laboratory -to coordinate and provide external quality control of peripheral microbiology laboratories through performing antimicrobial susceptibility testing, developing methodological recommendations, providing consulting and training support, collecting data and creating an AMR laboratory database.
- · Develop  data  collection  system,  specific  instruments/tools  and  standards,  which  can  be used  by  the epidemiological surveillance institutions at the national level so that information can be uploaded into regional databases, such as CAESAR.
- · Improve laboratory diagnostics in healthcare facilities; develop methodological guidelines in order to standardize collection, storage, transportation and testing of clinical samples.
- · Optimize  the  work  of  diagnostic  microbiological  laboratories  in  the  country  as  a  unified structure to survey development and spread of resistance.
- · Develop  normative  legal  acts,  provisions,  regulations,  instructions  and  methodological guidelines  on  microbiological  testing  for  antimicrobial  susceptibility  in  line  with  modern requirements.
- · Develop  and  implement  single  methodology  and  strict  standards  at  all  stages  for  the detection of antimicrobial susceptibility of bacteria, such as EUCAST methodology.
- · Provide  all  diagnostic  laboratories  which  perform  antimicrobial  susceptibility  tests  with reference strains for quality control, as well as all necessary supplies, reagents and modern laboratory equipment.
- · Develop and adopt standardized scheme for reporting of bacteriological testing results on AST in order to centralize monitoring activity and create a single database.
- · Ensure implementation of the EQA program for the national laboratory network for AST.
- · Provide  equipment  and  the  same  software  applications  to  microbiological  laboratories  in order to create a database, conduct monitoring, and submit and receive data in a timely manner;  unify  the  entire  microbiological  laboratory  services  into  a  single  electronic laboratory network.
- · Make choice, with support from WHO, of a Supranational Reference Laboratory that would be engaged in provision of consultative and methodological support and external quality control for National reference Laboratory.
- · Organize training courses for appropriate groups of specialists on AMR interventions.

## 5.3. Monitoring Accessibility of Antimicrobials

- · Develop and introduce the Law 'On Pharmaceuticals and Pharmaceutical Support of the Population of Turkmenist an',  which  is  planned  to  regulat e  retail  sale  of  antimicrobials only if they are prescribed by a physician as well as advertising activity and commercial promotion of antimicrobials.
- · Require that producers and pharmacological companies should collect and report data on antimicrobial distribution, including importation, sale and exportation.
- · Designate a national coordinator (focal point) responsible for collection and analysis of antimicrobials distribution, including importation, sale and exportation.
- · For methodology in antimicrobials surveillance, the WHO AMC network standards will be considered.

- · Ensure that only high standards of antimicrobial quality, safety and efficiency should be available in pharmaceutical commercial networks.

## 5.4. Rational Use of Antimicrobials and Strengthening Surveillance of their Use

## 5.4.1. Awareness Raising and Safety of Patients and Communities

- · Implement  national  educational  initiatives,  public  behavior  change  campaigns  and various public awareness programmes.
- · Regularly communicate information about resistance problems, rational antimicrobial use and harms from self-treatment to population, including through media.
- · Conduct various awareness raising events to emphasize the importance of the problem.

## 5.4.2. Education and Training of Health Professionals

- · Increase content and number of academic hours on the rational use of antimicrobials in the educational standards.
- · Introduce  special  course  on  the  rational  use  of  antimicrobials  in  the  pre-service (undergraduate) curriculum.
- · Develop specialized training programmes based on the national list of essential drugs and national register of medicines and clinical recommendations on the rational use of antimicrobials for the post-graduate training systems.
- · Expand coverage of health workers with educational/training programmes in all spheres of healthcare.

## 5.4.3. Education and Training of Pharmaceutical Workers

- · Increase content and number of academic hours on the rational use of antimicrobials in the educational standards.
- · Introduce  special  course  on  the  rational  use  of  antimicrobials  in  the  pre-service (undergraduate) curriculum.
- · Develop  specialized  training  programmes  on  the  rational  use  of  antimicrobials  for  the post-graduate training systems.
- · Expand coverage of pharmaceutical workers and pharmaceutical chemists with educational/training programmes.

## 5.4.4. Standardization of In-Patient and Out-Patient Treatment

- · Update national lists of essential drugs and national register of medicines on a regular basis.
- · Develop clinical recommendations (clinical protocols) for the rational use of antimicrobial drugs  as  treatment  standards  of  common  infections  in  outpatient  and  in-patient (hospital) practices and promote their official approval.
- · Organize training courses for all health practitioners on the use of clinical protocols on the rational use of antimicrobials for treatment of common infectious diseases in outpatient and in-patient practices.
- · Disseminate the above regulative documents to all health practitioners and pharmacists.
- · Ensure control of appropriateness of antimicrobials prescription, including doses and algorithms of use, in compliance with the approved clinical protocols.

- · Establish committees or designate specialists responsible for control of prescriptions and use of antimicrobials in healthcare facilities.

## 5.4.5. Prevention of Development and Spread of Antibiotic Resistance in Veterinary and Agriculture

- · Study AMR prevalence patterns and use of antimicrobials in  agricultural and domestic animals.
- · Strengthening the normative -regulatory documents for reduce and prohibit, in future, use of antibiotics as growth-promoting factors in veterinary and agriculture.
- · Study the possibility for establish a system of access to antibiotics for animals only when prescribed by a veterinarian.
- · Establish  integrated  surveillance  systems  for  antibiotic  resistance  (in  humans,  animals and foods) and use of antibiotics in food animals.
- · Expand coverage of veterinarians with educational/training programmes.
- · Expand    coverage  with  educational  activities  for  specialists  of  various  services  and industries  related  to  food  safety,  for  preventing  and  controlling  the  spread  of  AMR through the food chain.
- · Encourage compliance with the required hygiene and infection control measures in order to reduce the need for antibiotics.
- · Strengthen cross-sectoral and international cooperation in this field.

## Section 6. Programme Management and Implementation Mechanism

Organizational  and  managerial  work  related  to  the  implementation  of  the  strategy  is  the responsibility of the national working group (NWG) under the MoH&amp;MIT. Agencies interested in implementation  of  this  activity  will  be  included  in  the  NWG  in  future,  and  Interdepartmental coordination committee will be created.

The NWG is authorized to coordinate activities of healthcare facilities aimed at rational use of antimicrobials and AMR prevention.

## The NWG duties and responsibilities include:

- · Active and efficient implementation of the National AMR Strategy and Plan of Action.
- · Coordination of antimicrobial use regulation policy.
- · Coordination  of  monitoring  and  surveillance  of  resistance,  including  the  right  for projection (forecasting), mapping of AMR spread, and interventions to restrict the use of antimicrobials in order to ensure their effectiveness and prevent emerging resistance.
- · Organization of periodic meetings to discuss progress in the Action Plan and Strategy implementation.
- · Monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the  National  Strategy  and  Action  Plan  implementation, analysis and conclusions to inform decision making for effective Strategy implementation and achievement of its goals and objectives.

## The MoH&amp;MIT State Sanitary &amp; Epidemiological Service is authorized to coordinate and monitor implementation of the National AMR Strategy.

## Key implementing agencies:

- · All structural subdivisions of the Ministry of Health and Medical Industry.

- · All health facilities and institutions, irrespective of their forms of ownership or types of activity.
- · Turkmen State Medical University and other medical education institutions.
- · Diagnostic laboratories.
- · Pharmaceutical companies and pharmacies, irrespective of their forms of ownership or types of activity.
- · State Veterinary Service.
- · Professional associations, societies, non-governmental organizations.

Organizations and institutions are Strategy implementers, irrespective of the forms or types of their activities.

Government  administration,  ministries,  agencies  and  local  self-governance  authorities  can  be involved in joint activities

## Financing

- · State Budget
- · International organizations' and donors' funds.

## Research and Practical Applications

Scientific and research works in the field of antimicrobial resistance and practical application of innovative methods for rational use of antimicrobials are planned within the framework of the Strategy implementation.

## International Cooperation

Engagement in collaboration with WHO, UNICEF, FAO, OIE and other international organizations and associations in the field of rational use of antimicrobials and containment of antimicrobial resistance. Active participation in joint projects, international meetings, conferences, seminars, experience sharing and exchange of information.

## Monitoring and Evaluation

An  effective  system  for  monitoring  and  evaluation  (M&amp;E)  of  implementation  of  the  National Strategy  and  Action  Plan  allows  stakeholders  to  compare  actual  progress  with  the  expected results.  The  National  AMR  Working  Group  has  the  key  role  and  responsibility  for  conducting M&amp;E  and  measuring  the  implementation  results.  M&amp;E  includes  regular  monitoring  reviews, preparation  of  annual  reports  and  progress  reports  in  accordance  with  the  National  AMR Strategy and Action Plan. Detailed monitoring mechanism should be discussed and approved at the AMR working group meeting.

An important role and ownership of the National AMR Strategy is placed with the MoH&amp;MIT, SSES, SVS MoA and their subordinate institutions and organizations. Equally important for the Strategy implementation is technical assistance and support from the international partners.

Annex  2. Plan  of  Actions  for  implementation  of  the  National  Strategy  for  Containment  of Antimicrobial Resistance in Turkmenistan, 2017-2025.

Annex 3. Plan  of  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  implementation  of  the  National  Strategy  for Containment of Antimicrobial Resistance in Turkmenistan, 2017-2025.

## Annex 2.

Order of Ministry of Health and Medical Industry of Turkmenistan №371 ,   16 November 2017 года

## Plan of Actions for Implementation of the National Strategy for Containment of Antimicrobial Resistance in Turkmenistan,

## 2017-2025

| №                                        | Activity                                                                                                                                                                                        | Timeframes                               | Implementer s                            | Responsible  agencies                    | Remarks                                  |
|------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| 1. Organization and Management           | 1. Organization and Management                                                                                                                                                                  | 1. Organization and Management           | 1. Organization and Management           | 1. Organization and Management           | 1. Organization and Management           |
| 1.1                                      | Establish AMR NWG                                                                                                                                                                               | 2015                                     | MoH&MIT  SSES                            | SSES                                     |                                          |
| 1.2                                      | Develop consolidated data collection and analysis system for Action Plan implementation                                                                                                         |                                          |                                          |                                          |                                          |
| 1.3                                      | Conduct regular NWG meetings to discuss progress of the Action Plan implementation                                                                                                              | Once in 6  months and  as needed         | MoH&MIT  SSES                            | SSES                                     |                                          |
| 1.4                                      | Actively use resources of the AMR Information Resource Center in Ashgabat city SES                                                                                                              | On-going                                 | MoH&MIT  SSES                            | SSES                                     |                                          |
| 1.5                                      | Prepare annual reports on:  - AMR surveillance,  - use of antimicrobials in health facilities,   - resistance indicators,  - joint work on AMR and use of antimicrobials in Veterinary Services | Once a  year, in  January                | MoH&MIT  SSES  Ministry of  Agriculture  | SSES                                     |                                          |
| 2. Control of  А ntimicrobial Resistance | 2. Control of  А ntimicrobial Resistance                                                                                                                                                        | 2. Control of  А ntimicrobial Resistance | 2. Control of  А ntimicrobial Resistance | 2. Control of  А ntimicrobial Resistance | 2. Control of  А ntimicrobial Resistance |
| 2.1                                      | Create a national AMR surveillance system to collect, analyze and report data on emergence                                                                                                      | 2017-2025                                | MoH&MIT                                  | SSES                                     |                                          |

|     | and dynamics of resistance of certain pathogens, including reporting of new resistant cases                                                                                                 |                                   | SSES          |              |
|-----|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|---------------|--------------|
| 2.2 | Designate  sentinel  surveillance  institutions  (hospitals  and  polyclinics /' houses  of  health ')  with  servicing laboratories for AMR monitoring and AMS testing                     | 2017 with  extension  untill 2025 | MoH&MIT  SSES | SSES    PHNC |
| 2.3 | Develop national guidelines on AMR surveillance in the country                                                                                                                              | 2017-2018                         | MoH&MIT  SSES | SSES         |
| 2.4 | Develop data collection system and specific tools, including software applications (such as WHO  NET) and standards, to be used by the AMR surveillance institutions                        | 2017-2025                         | MoH&MIT  SSES | SSES         |
| 2.5 | Designate  laboratories  which  should  perform  AST    (create  the  national  network  of  AST  laboratories)                                                                             | 2017-2018                         | MoH&MIT  SSES | SSES    PHNC |
| 2.6 | Develop  and  adopt  a  standardized  bacteriological  reporting  system  (by  microorganisms,  resistance rates) in order to centralize monitoring and create an integrated database       | 2017-2018                         | MoH&MIT  SSES | SSES    PHNC |
| 2.7 | Join WHO CAESAR network for AMR data exchange                                                                                                                                               | 2017                              | MoH&MIT  SSES | SSES         |
| 2.8 | Optimize work and strengthen infrastructural and human resource capacities of microbiological,  clinical and food laboratories as an integrated structure to survey AMR emerging and spread | 2017-2025                         | MoH&MIT  SSES | SSES    PHNC |
| 2.9 | Supply laboratories with media, reagents and methodological guidelines in line with the EUCAST  standards (European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing)                      | 2017-2025                         | MoH&MIT  SSES | SSES    PHNC |
| 2.1 | Develop guidelines/manuals for microbiological tests for some AMR-related syndromes in line  with the EUCAST standards (European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing)         | 2017-2018                         | MoH&MIT  SSES | SSES    PHNC |

|   2.11 | Adoption  of  modern  methods  of  AMR  diagnostics  and  international  standards  and  recommendations into practices                                                                                                                                                             | 2017-2018           | MoH&MIT  SSES   | SSES    PHNC       |
|--------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|-----------------|--------------------|
|   2.12 | Develop guidelines, regulations, and methodologies to align and standardize rules for collection,  storage, transportation and testing of clinical samples for antimicrobial susceptibility in line with  modern international requirements                                         | 2017-2025           | MoH&MIT  SSES   | SSES    PHNC       |
|   2.13 | Designate a national AMR reference laboratory with approved an statute and workplan                                                                                                                                                                                                 | 2017  1 st  quarter | MoH&MIT  SSES   | SSES    PHNC       |
|   2.14 | Identify,  with  WHO  support,  a  collaborating  center  (supranational  laboratory)  which  would  provide consultancy, methodological support and external quality control for NRL                                                                                               | 2017                | MoH&MIT  SSES   | SSES    PHNC       |
|   2.15 | Develop  and  integrate  internal  and  external  quality  control  systems  in  laboratories  performing  AMS-testing                                                                                                                                                              | 2017-2025           | MoH&MIT  SSES   | SSES    PHNC       |
|   2.16 | Arrange  participation  of  the  national  AMR  reference-laboratory  and  other  national  laboratories  in  the  AMR  external  quality  control  programmes  (such  as  annual  EQAP  of  CAESAR)                                                                                | Annually            | MoH&MIT  SSES   | SSES    PHNC CPEDI |
|   2.17 | Create a single integrated data base with general access from all microbiological laboratories  (combined into a single electronic network and using the same software) for monitoring, timely  distribution and receiving data for all microbiological laboratories in the country | 2017-2025           | MoH&MIT  SSES   | SSES               |
|   2.18 | Conduct training courses on AMR surveillance for various professional groups                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 2017-2025           | MoH&MIT  SSES   | SSES               |
|   2.19 | Provide various professional groups with developed and approved AMR surveillance  guidelines and regulations                                                                                                                                                                        | 2017-2025           | MoH&MIT  SSES   | SSES               |

| 3.                                     | Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases                                                                                                                                                               | Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases   | Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases   | Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases   | Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases   |
|----------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
| 3.1                                    | Strengthen infection control programmes in health facilities through implementation of modern  infection  control  recommendations  and  interventions  and  prevent  nosocomial  (in-hospital)  infections | 2017-2025                                       | MoH&MIT  SSES                                   | SSES                                            |                                                 |
| 3.2                                    | Develop  national  guidelines  for  infection  control  and  prevention  of  nosocomial  (in-hospital)  infections                                                                                          | 2017                                            | MoH&MIT  SSES                                   | SSES                                            |                                                 |
| 3.3                                    | Revise/update/develop infection control standard regulations                                                                                                                                                | 2016-2025                                       | MoH&MIT  SSES                                   | SSES                                            |                                                 |
| 3.4                                    | Ensure that Infection Control Committees (ICC) in all health facilities are strengthened and  provided methodological and consultative support                                                              | 2016-2025                                       | MoH&MIT  SSES                                   | SSES                                            |                                                 |
| 3.5                                    | Conduct  Training-of-Trainer  workshops  for  national  trainers  who  would  provide  cascade  trainings on infection control in health facilities for different specialists                               | 2017-2025                                       | MoH&MIT  SSES                                   | SSES                                            |                                                 |
| 3.6                                    | Conduct  training  workshops  on  infection  control  and  prevention  of  nosocomial  infections  for  health specialists from health facilities and SES services                                          | 2017-2025                                       | MoH&MIT  SSES                                   | SSES                                            |                                                 |
| 3.7                                    | Consider  establishment  of  epidemiologist  positions  in  the  health  facility  staffing  patterns  and  ensure that they should be trained to work in the health facility settings                      | 2017-2018                                       | MoH&MIT  SSES                                   | SSES                                            |                                                 |
| 3.9                                    | Conduct  regular  monitoring  of  infection  control  measures  in  health  facilities  to  make  recommendations and inform decision making                                                                | 2017-2025                                       | MoH&MIT  SSES                                   | SSES                                            |                                                 |
| 4. Control of access to antimicrobials | 4. Control of access to antimicrobials                                                                                                                                                                      | 4. Control of access to antimicrobials          | 4. Control of access to antimicrobials          | 4. Control of access to antimicrobials          | 4. Control of access to antimicrobials          |
| 4.1                                    | Implement enforcement measures of the Law of Turkmenistan  On the Supply of  ' Medicines'                                                                                                                   | 2017-2025                                       | MoH&MIT  SRC  Bash  Dermanhana  Association     | MoH&MIT  SRC                                    |                                                 |
| 4.1                                    | Develop and implement regulations for sale of antimicrobials                                                                                                                                                | 2017-2025                                       | MoH&MIT  SRC  Bash                              | MoH&MIT  SRC                                    |                                                 |

|     |                                                                                                                                                                                    |                     | Dermanhana  Association                     |              |
|-----|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|---------------------------------------------|--------------|
| 4.2 | Develop protocols for data collection and analysis based on the international standards for  antimicrobial use, based on AMC methodology                                           | 2017-2018           | MoH&MIT  SRC  Bash  Dermanhana  Association | MoH&MIT  SRC |
| 4.3 | Develop and enforce mandatory antimicrobial reporting by manufacturers, pharmacies and  pharmaceutical companies (including data on importation, sale and exportation)             | 2016-2017           | MoH&MIT  SRC  Bash  Dermanhana  Association | MoH&MIT  SRC |
| 4.4 | Develop and enforce mandatory reporting on antimicrobial use in health facilities                                                                                                  | 2016-2017           | MoH&MIT  SRC  Bash  Dermanhana  Association | MoH&MIT  SRC |
| 4.5 | Join WHO AMC network for AMC data exchange                                                                                                                                         | 2018                | MoH&MIT  SRC  Bash  Dermanhana  Association | MoH&MIT  SRC |
| 4.6 | Designate a national coordinator (focal point) of antimicrobial data collection and analysis  (including importation, sale and exportation). Consider WHO AMC Network methodology. | 2017  1 st  quarter | MoH&MIT  SRC  Bash  Dermanhana  Association | MoH&MIT  SRC |

| 4.7                                                               | Ensure acquisition and sale of antimicrobials which meet standards of quality, safety and  effectiveness                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | 2017-2025                                                         | MoH&MIT  SRC  Bash  Dermanhana  Association                       | MoH&MIT  SRC                                                                                       |                                                                   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 5. Enhancement of Rational Use and Surveillance of Antimicrobials | 5. Enhancement of Rational Use and Surveillance of Antimicrobials                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 5. Enhancement of Rational Use and Surveillance of Antimicrobials | 5. Enhancement of Rational Use and Surveillance of Antimicrobials | 5. Enhancement of Rational Use and Surveillance of Antimicrobials                                  | 5. Enhancement of Rational Use and Surveillance of Antimicrobials |
| 5.1. Public Awareness and Safety of Patients                      | 5.1. Public Awareness and Safety of Patients                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 5.1. Public Awareness and Safety of Patients                      | 5.1. Public Awareness and Safety of Patients                      | 5.1. Public Awareness and Safety of Patients                                                       | 5.1. Public Awareness and Safety of Patients                      |
| 5.1.1                                                             | Implement, including with mass media, national educational and training initiatives, behavior  change  campaigns  and  various  public  information/communication  and  awareness  raising  programmes  on  the  extent  of  the  resistance  problem,  rational  use  of  antimicrobials,  and  harms caused by self-treatments | 2017-2025                                                         | MoH&MIT.  SSES     Health  Information  Center                    | MoH&MIT.  SSES,  Health  Information  Center,  'Health of  Turkmenista n' and  'Saglyk'  magazines |                                                                   |
| 5.1.2                                                             | Conduct a national World Antibiotics Week campaign                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Annually, in  November                                            | MoH&MIT  SSES     Health  Information  Center                     | Health  Information  Center                                                                        |                                                                   |
| 5.2. Education and Training of Health Workers                     | 5.2. Education and Training of Health Workers                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 5.2. Education and Training of Health Workers                     | 5.2. Education and Training of Health Workers                     | 5.2. Education and Training of Health Workers                                                      | 5.2. Education and Training of Health Workers                     |
| 5.2.1                                                             | Introduce special course on the rational use of antimicrobials in the pre-service curriculum in  secondary and higher education                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 2017-2025                                                         | MoH&MIT  TSMU                                                     | TSMU                                                                                               |                                                                   |
| 5.2.2                                                             | Develop specialized programmes on the rational use of antimicrobials for in-service (post- graduate) curriculums based on the National List of Essential Drugs, National Register of  Medicines and clinical protocols for the rational use of antimicrobials                                                                    | 2017-2025                                                         | MoH&MIT  TSMU                                                     | TSMU                                                                                               |                                                                   |

| 5.2.3                                                             | Expand coverage of health practitioners and nursing staff in outpatient and in-patient care  with education and training (package of documents)                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | 2017-2025                                                         | MoH&MIT.  TSMU                                                    | MoH&MIT,  TSMU,  IESC                                             |                                                                   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 5.3.                                                              | Education and Training of Pharmaceutical Workers                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Education and Training of Pharmaceutical Workers                  | Education and Training of Pharmaceutical Workers                  | Education and Training of Pharmaceutical Workers                  | Education and Training of Pharmaceutical Workers                  |
| 5.3.1                                                             | Introduce special course on the rational use of antimicrobials in the pre-service curriculum                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 2017-2025                                                         | MoH&MIT  TSMU                                                     | TSMU                                                              |                                                                   |
| 5.3.2                                                             | Develop specialized programmes on the rational use of antimicrobials for in-service (post- graduate) curriculums                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 2017-2025                                                         | MoH&MIT  TSMU                                                     | TSMU                                                              |                                                                   |
| 5.3.3                                                             | Expand coverage of pharmacists with education and training                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 2017-2025                                                         | MoH&MIT  TSMU                                                     | MoH&MIT  TSMU                                                     |                                                                   |
| 5.4. Standardization of Outpatient and In-Patient (Hospital) Care | 5.4. Standardization of Outpatient and In-Patient (Hospital) Care                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | 5.4. Standardization of Outpatient and In-Patient (Hospital) Care | 5.4. Standardization of Outpatient and In-Patient (Hospital) Care | 5.4. Standardization of Outpatient and In-Patient (Hospital) Care | 5.4. Standardization of Outpatient and In-Patient (Hospital) Care |
| 5.4.1                                                             | Update National List of Essential Drugs and National Register of Medicines on a regular basis                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | 2017-2025                                                         | MoH&MIT  TSMU     SRC                                             | MoH&MIT                                                           |                                                                   |
| 5.4.2                                                             | Conduct  training  courses  on  development  of  clinical  protocols  on  the  rational  use  of  antimicrobials for treatment of common infectious diseases and antimicrobial-related syndromes  in  outpatient  and  in-patient  care  (otitis,  sinusitis,  pharyngitis,  acute  bronchitis,  urinary  infections  and etc), with support from international experts | 2017-2018                                                         | MoH&MIT  TSMU       WHO                                           | MoH&MIT                                                           |                                                                   |
| 5.4.3                                                             | Develop  and  approve  clinical  protocols  for  rational  use  of  antimicrobials  in  treatment  of  common infectious diseases and antimicrobial-related  syndromes  in outpatient  and  in-patient  care (otitis, sinusitis, pharyngitis, acute bronchitis, urinary infections and etc)                                                                             | 2017-2018                                                         | MoH&MIT  TSMU       WHO                                           | MoH&MIT                                                           |                                                                   |
| 5.4.4                                                             | Conduct training workshops for all health practitioners on implementation of clinical protocols  for  rational  use  of  antimicrobials  in  treatment  of  common  infectious  diseases  and  antimicrobial-related syndromes in outpatient and in-patient care (otitis, sinusitis, pharyngitis,  acute bronchitis, urinary infections  and etc)                       | 2017-2025                                                         | MoH&MIT  TSMU       WHO                                           | MoH&MIT                                                           |                                                                   |
| 5.4.5                                                             | Provide clinical protocols for rational use of antimicrobials in treatment of common infectious  diseases and antimicrobial-related syndromes in outpatient and in-patient care (otitis, sinusitis,  pharyngitis,  acute  bronchitis,  urinary  infections    and  etc)  to  all  health  practitioners  and                                                            | 2017-2025                                                         | MoH&MIT                                                           | MoH&MIT                                                           |                                                                   |

|                                                                                             | pharmacists                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                             |                                                                                             |                                                                                             |                                                                                             |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 5.4.6                                                                                       | Designate a specialist (group of specialists) responsible for control of prescription and use of  antimicrobials in outpatient and inpatient healthcare practices.   Develop Terms of Reference describing duties, responsibilities, functions and composition of  the group | 2017                                                                                        | MoH&MIT                                                                                     | MoH&MIT                                                                                     |                                                                                             |
| 5.4.7                                                                                       | Monitor prescriptions of antimicrobials in healthcare practices, including their numbers and   2017-2025  dosages in accordance with the approved clinical protocols                                                                                                         |                                                                                             | MoH&MIT                                                                                     | MoH&MIT                                                                                     |                                                                                             |
| Prevention of Development and Spread of Antibiotic Resistance in Veterinary and Agriculture | Prevention of Development and Spread of Antibiotic Resistance in Veterinary and Agriculture                                                                                                                                                                                  | Prevention of Development and Spread of Antibiotic Resistance in Veterinary and Agriculture | Prevention of Development and Spread of Antibiotic Resistance in Veterinary and Agriculture | Prevention of Development and Spread of Antibiotic Resistance in Veterinary and Agriculture | Prevention of Development and Spread of Antibiotic Resistance in Veterinary and Agriculture |
| 6.1                                                                                         | Designate an AMR coordinator (focal point) in the veterinary sector                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 2017  1 st  quarter                                                                         | SVS MoA SSES                                                                                | SVS MoA                                                                                     |                                                                                             |
| 6.2                                                                                         | Conduct study the use of antimicrobials in the veterinary sector                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 2017-2025                                                                                   | SVS MoA SSES                                                                                | SVS MoA                                                                                     |                                                                                             |
| 6.3                                                                                         | Conduct trainings on the rational use of antimicrobials for veterinarians                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 2017-2025                                                                                   | SVS MoA SSES     VS MoA  WHO                                                                | S                                                                                           |                                                                                             |
| 6.4                                                                                         | Strengthening the normative-regulatory documents on excluding  the use of antimicrobials  for growth in veterinary and agriculture                                                                                                                                           | 2017-2025                                                                                   | SVS MoA SSES                                                                                | SVS MoA                                                                                     |                                                                                             |
| 6.5                                                                                         | Study of possibility of establish a system of access to antimicrobials for the use in the animal  health sector only when prescribed by a veterinarian                                                                                                                       | 2017-2025                                                                                   | SVS MoA                                                                                     | SVS MoA                                                                                     |                                                                                             |
| 6.6                                                                                         | Establish  integrated  surveillance  systems  for  antibiotic  resistance  (in  humans,  animals  and  foods) and use of antibiotics in food animals                                                                                                                         | 2025                                                                                        | SVS MoA SSES                                                                                | SVS MoA                                                                                     |                                                                                             |
| 6.7                                                                                         | Expand the coverage of educational activities for specialists of various services and industries  related to food safety, for preventing and controlling the spread of AMR through the food  chain                                                                           | 2018-2025                                                                                   | MoH&MIT   SSES       SVS  MoA,  Ministry of  Trade and  Foreign  Economic  Relations        | MoH&MIT   SSES        SVS MoA,  Ministry of  Trade and  Foreign  Economic  Relations        |                                                                                             |

|                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                   | and others                                                        | and others                                                        |                                                                   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 7. Monitoring and Evaluation of Implementation of the Action Plan | 7. Monitoring and Evaluation of Implementation of the Action Plan                                                                                                                                                              | 7. Monitoring and Evaluation of Implementation of the Action Plan | 7. Monitoring and Evaluation of Implementation of the Action Plan | 7. Monitoring and Evaluation of Implementation of the Action Plan | 7. Monitoring and Evaluation of Implementation of the Action Plan |
| 7.1                                                               | Ensure monitoring and evaluation of implementation of the Action Plan                                                                                                                                                          | 2017-2025                                                         | MoH&MIT   SSES       SVS  MoA                                     | MoH&MIT   SSES        SVS MoA                                     |                                                                   |
| 8. International Collaboration and Cross-Sectoral Cooperation     | 8. International Collaboration and Cross-Sectoral Cooperation                                                                                                                                                                  | 8. International Collaboration and Cross-Sectoral Cooperation     | 8. International Collaboration and Cross-Sectoral Cooperation     | 8. International Collaboration and Cross-Sectoral Cooperation     | 8. International Collaboration and Cross-Sectoral Cooperation     |
| 8.1                                                               | Consider participation  in  the  WHO  regional  AMR  surveillance  networks  (CAESAR) and  AMC  network (AMC)                                                                                                                  | 2017                                                              | MoH&MIT   SSES       SVS  MoA WHO                                 | SSES                                                              |                                                                   |
| 8.2                                                               | Consider participation in the Global Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance System (GLASS)                                                                                                                                      | 2017                                                              | MoH&MIT   SSES       SVS  MoA WHO                                 | SSES                                                              |                                                                   |
| 8.3                                                               | Collaborate with WHO and other international organizations and associations in the field of  rational  use  of  antimicrobials  and  containment  of  antimicrobial  resistance,  and  infection  control in health facilities | 2017-2025                                                         | MoH&MIT   SSES       SVS  MoA WHO       FAO       MEB   UNICEF    | SSES                                                              |                                                                   |
| 8.4                                                               | Participate  actively  in  the  joint  projects,  operational  research,  international  meetings,  conferences, workshops and information exchange and experience sharing activities                                          | 2017-2025                                                         | MoH&MIT   SSES       SVS  MoA WHO       FAO       MEB   UNICEF    | SSES                                                              |                                                                   |

## Plan of Monitoring and Evaluation of Implementation of the National Strategy for Containment of Antimicrobial Resistance in

## Turkmenistan, 2017-2025

|   No. | Area / Indicators                                                                                          | Outputs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Outcomes                                                                                                                                                            |
|-------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|   1   | Organization and Management                                                                                | Organization and Management                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Organization and Management                                                                                                                                         |
|   1.1 | Establishment of a National Coordination Group  (NCG) comprised of representatives from different  sectors | Officially designated NCG with description of its  mandate and nominal membership, and involved  stakeholder ministries/agencies and individuals                                                                                                                                                                      | -                                                                                                                                                                   |
|   1.2 | National Strategy for Containment of Antimicrobial  Resistance and Action Plan                             | National Strategy for Containment of  Antimicrobial Resistance and Action Plan   approved by the Government                                                                                                                                                                                                           | -                                                                                                                                                                   |
|   2   | Control of Antimicrobial Resistance                                                                        | Control of Antimicrobial Resistance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Control of Antimicrobial Resistance                                                                                                                                 |
|   2.1 | AMR epidemiological surveillance system                                                                    | • National guidelines for AMR surveillance  developed  • AMR data recording and reporting system is in  place • Health specialists of different medical  professions trained on AMR interventions,  including implementation of the national AMR  surveillance guidelines at the  national/provincial/district levels | National AMR surveillance data  are comparable both at the  national and at the regional/global  levels   Number of trained health  specialists increases each year |
|   2.2 | AMS testing data                                                                                           | • Officially designated AMR reference  laboratory carries out coordination and control  of the laboratories which perform AMS tests   • Single integrated AMS laboratory system is in  place at the national/provincial/district level                                                                                | AMS surveillance data can be  used as a management and  optimization tool for future AMR  measures and interventions                                                |

|     |                                                                                                 | • Microbiological landscape and antimicrobial  resistance to main pathogens data is  available at the national/provincial/district  levels  • Number of laboratories which perform AMS  tests in line with the updated requirements  (system)                                                                                                          | Number of laboratories which  perform AMS tests in line with the  new requirements increased                                           |
|-----|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 3   | Prevention of Infectious Diseases and Infection Control                                         | Prevention of Infectious Diseases and Infection Control                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Prevention of Infectious Diseases and Infection Control                                                                                |
| 3.1 | Infection Control and prevention Programme                                                      | • National guidelines for infection  prevention and control developed   • % of hospitals which implement Infection  Control Programme   • Health specialists of different medical  professions trained on implementation of  the national guidelines of infection  prevention and control at the  national/provincial/district levels                  | Number of hospitals which  implement  Infection Control  Programme increased  Number of trained health  specialists increases annually |
| 3.2 | Infection surveillance / general reasons for the use of  antibiotics                            | • Top 10 common nosocomial (in-hospital)  infections in adults and children (list of  infections developed)  • Top 10 common outpatient infections in  adults and children (list of infections  developed)   • Top 10 key community-spread syndromes  which require prescription of antibiotics to  adults and children (list of syndromes  developed) | Surveillance data focused on the  rational use of antibiotics                                                                          |
| 3.3 | Surveillance of nosocomial (in-hospital) infections  (Treatment-related infections - healthcare | • Prevalence of common treatment-related  infections in children and adults                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | TRI reduction trends                                                                                                                   |

|     | associated infections)                                                                                 |                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|-----|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 4   | Control of Access to Antimicrobials                                                                    | Control of Access to Antimicrobials                                                  | Control of Access to Antimicrobials                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 4.1 | Development of a mandatory data reporting system  for antimicrobials' use                              | • A mandatory reporting system of  antimicrobials' use is in place                   | Information and data of  antimicrobial use is available for  analysis and decision making   Reduction of use of antimicrobials  in the country (improvement of the  rational use of antibiotics), and  thus reduction of inefficient use    Reduction of use of broad- spectrum antibiotics  Increase of use of narrow- spectrum antibiotics |
| 4.2 | Antimicrobials' quality control through the whole  production chain (from manufacture to  consumption) | • Increased number of spot-checks of  antimicrobials' quality control in the  market | Reduction trends in the numbers  of identified cases of inappropriate  quality of antimicrobials                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| 4.3 | Names and amounts of antimicrobials domestically  produced and imported                                | • Monitoring data trends                                                             | Reduction of use of antimicrobials  in the country (improvement of the  rational use of antibiotics), and  thus reduction of inefficient use    Reduction of use of broad- spectrum antibiotics  Increase of use of narrow- spectrum antibiotics                                                                                             |
| 4.4 | Names and amounts of antimicrobials sold in retail  pharmacy network in the country                    | • Monitoring data trends                                                             | Data can be used as a valuable  tool of AMR management and  optimization, future measures and  interventions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

|     |                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Reduction of use of broad- spectrum antibiotics  Increase of use of narrow- spectrum antibiotics                                                                                                                                                                            |
|-----|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 4.5 | Development of bylaws (regulations) for sale of  antimicrobials only when prescribed                               | • Sale of antimicrobials in pharmacy  network only when prescribed by a  physician                                                                                                                                            | Rational use of antimicrobials in  the country                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| 4.6 | Government control of antimicrobials' commercial  promotion/advertisement                                          | • Control of antimicrobials' commercial  promotion/advertisement is in place                                                                                                                                                  | Data can be used as a valuable  tool of AMR management and  optimization, future measures and  interventions                                                                                                                                                                |
| 5   | Control of   the right assignment and rational use of Antimicrobials                                               | Control of   the right assignment and rational use of Antimicrobials                                                                                                                                                          | Control of   the right assignment and rational use of Antimicrobials                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| 5.1 | MoH&MIT-approved clinical protocols for treatment  of common infectious diseases are available                     | • Clinical protocols for treatment of  common infectious diseases developed  and approved by the MoH&MIT decree;  • Gradual increase of the number of health  workers trained to use these protocols  and their accessibility | Improvement of the AMR legal  regulations in line with the  international standards and  recommendations   Data can be used as a valuable  tool of AMR management and  optimization, future measures and  interventions  Capacity building for AMR control  and containment |
| 5.2 | A system for on-going supervision of correct  prescriptions of antimicrobials at the PHC and  hospital care levels | • Supervision system is in place                                                                                                                                                                                              | Improvement of the AMR legal  regulations in line with the  international standards and  recommendations   Data can be used as a valuable  tool of AMR management and  optimization, future measures and  interventions  Capacity building for AMR control  and containment |
| 5.3 | Most frequently prescribed antimicrobials at the  PHC and hospital care levels                                     | • Dynamics of data monitored and used for  feedback to PHC facilities and hospitals  for continuous comparisons and  improvements                                                                                             | Improvement of the AMR legal  regulations in line with the  international standards and  recommendations   Data can be used as a valuable  tool of AMR management and  optimization, future measures and  interventions  Capacity building for AMR control  and containment |
| 5.4 | Average duration of antimicrobial treatment at the  PHC and hospital care levels                                   | • Alignment of data with the regulative  documents - over time trends and results  used for continuous comparison and                                                                                                         | Improvement of the AMR legal  regulations in line with the  international standards and  recommendations   Data can be used as a valuable  tool of AMR management and  optimization, future measures and  interventions  Capacity building for AMR control  and containment |

|     |                                                                                                                                                                                                     | improvement at different levels of the   healthcare system                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|-----|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 5.5 | Awareness raising of health workers and general  public about infectious diseases and effective   antimicrobial treatment                                                                           | • Awareness raising                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| 5.6 | AMR training programme for health specialists                                                                                                                                                       | • AMR training programme for health  specialists is in place                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| 6   | Prevention of Emergence and Spread of Resistance to Antimicrobials Used in Veterinary and Agriculture                                                                                               | Prevention of Emergence and Spread of Resistance to Antimicrobials Used in Veterinary and Agriculture | Prevention of Emergence and Spread of Resistance to Antimicrobials Used in Veterinary and Agriculture                                                                                   |
| 6.1 | Strengthening of normative regulatory base for  prohibition to use antibiotics as a growth promotion  factor in veterinarian sector                                                                 | • Legal regulations developed and enforced                                                            | Implementation of antimicrobials'  restriction measures in veterinary  and agriculture  Raising of awareness on AMR  problem   Strengthening of cross- sectoral/interagency cooperation |
| 6.2 | A system to oversee the use of antibiotics in  veterinary and agricultural sectors (including water  sector)                                                                                        | • The system is in place at the local level                                                           | Implementation of antimicrobials'  restriction measures in veterinary  and agriculture  Raising of awareness on AMR  problem   Strengthening of cross- sectoral/interagency cooperation |
| 6.3 | Expand the coverage of educational activities for  specialists of various services and industries  related to food safety, for preventing and controlling  the spread of AMR through the food chain | • The educational activities on awareness  raising were conducted                                     | Implementation of antimicrobials'  restriction measures in veterinary  and agriculture  Raising of awareness on AMR  problem   Strengthening of cross- sectoral/interagency cooperation |
| 6.4 | Cross-sectoral (interagency) cooperation                                                                                                                                                            | • Joint actions to implement the National  AMR Strategy                                               | Implementation of antimicrobials'  restriction measures in veterinary  and agriculture  Raising of awareness on AMR  problem   Strengthening of cross- sectoral/interagency cooperation |
| 7   | Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                                                                                           | Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                             | Monitoring and Evaluation                                                                                                                                                               |
| 7.1 | Conducting monitoring and evaluation                                                                                                                                                                | • M&E results of implementation of the  National AMR Strategy                                         | Availability of data to track  progress of the National AMR  Strategy implementation and to  take actions                                                                               |
| 8   | International Collaboration                                                                                                                                                                         | International Collaboration                                                                           | International Collaboration                                                                                                                                                             |
| 8.1 | International collaboration in AMR field                                                                                                                                                            | • International cooperation in AMR  laboratory diagnostics                                            | International collaboration and  implementation of the WHA  resolutions about AMR, IHR and                                                                                              |